The five mistakes, errors of the meditations. These are things I have mentioned before to you, but
maybe not this time, but I will take these.
Again, I think maybe we covered those things during these teachings, but first is the meditation or
the practice.
It's not just a meditation practice, it's laziness. The first number one is laziness.
Second obstacle is forget instructions. Also that means forget the principle instructions.
Maybe you did a lot of instructions teaching, but we have to remember the principle instructions.
So, forget the instructions. Now, when we don't have the laziness, when we didn't forget the
principle instructions, now we begin to meditate.
May it be meditating or the practices. Now, first obstacle, what comes during the meditation? There
are two obstacles that we all know.
Those are known as in the Tibetan world, Summa and Gopas. Summa means, if I translated that, just
as it is, sinking mind. Sinking.
And Gopas means wild, busy. These two are the principle obstacles during our practices.
That means that we didn't have the laziness, we were very energetic, began to sit down on the
cushion or on the chair. That's why we sit on the chair and cushion.
Although we didn't forget the principle instructions, we had good postures, good styles, all
aspects, and sitting there. So, we didn't forget.
Now, we are meditating or we practice. During the meditation, during the practices, these are two
obstacles.
Every practice passes, everyone. This is sinking mind and busy-ness mind. If I use the word sinking
mind in a different way, darkness.
That is the sinking mind, it's the very word, Summa.
Summa. And that also then leads, what? That dozing-ness, that darkness, that sinking mind, lead, we
fall asleep, feeling sleepy.
Then, now you are sitting on the beautiful cushion or in the chair and the rest of you didn't
forget, but now we fall asleep.
Which is good, yes, but we fall asleep. But what it is, that will prevent our growth, growth of the
progress of the meditation.
So they are disturbed. And then busy-ness, our mind is begin. There is many different levels of
also busy-ness, very become wild, emotions are disturbing.
The past emotions or the memories of the past or the present or future thought, anxiety, all that
kind of completely become so much turbulence, that's the very kind of big busy-ness.
And then wandering generally cannot just rest, but nothing too much, big emotions, almost kind of
neutral status.
And just without really any reasons, without any big deals, that mind is not wandering.
Wondering just like almost become what dear dreamers, kind of just dear dreamers, just that.
Whatever that is, whether it's yesterday, whether it's kind of nice appealing thoughts, or whether
it's kind of just air, very air, regular thoughts.
Whatever, but it distracts the mind, it really distracts the mind.
And then in a small busy-ness, it's kind of almost under currents, under currents, busy-ness
thoughts.
That's something that even you maybe didn't notice, almost.
That mongol with dousiness, dousiness, and then you're wondering that, isn't it? In the Buddha
teaching said, "napto honju".
It's something that under currents, under currents, it looks like on the surface level, good, nice
and good, but then under currents of the thoughts are disturbing.
Even that is, no matter whatever, it is disturbing for the progress of our practices, our
progressive practices.
So therefore, during the meditation and practices, we always try to remember that this, whatever
that is, it is a disturbance.
It slows down our progress. It slows down our real possessions.
Then, also, overall, our practice has not become good qualities.
Maybe it's good conscious level, good, one hour, two hours, or half hour, whatever, conscious level
, maybe you're really doing that, but call it a level, it's not good.
Therefore, to make call it, for those reasons, what the great Master, Gaurav Amma Samba said in
teaching, "teaching, make short breaks, short time, good call it".
This is one of his, of course, other teachings, great Master says one after another in one voice.
But Gaurav Amma Samba said he gave the instructions to the queen of came mother example.
Mother example was Chisholm's son, and when Gaurav Amma Samba gave the instructions, she asked how
to meditate, Gaurav Amma Samba said,
"Yuntong dhaan yung taun mein khaajong tupala" in Tibet, so that's great technique that Gaurav Amma
Samba used many times.
What does that mean? Short time, many times, as leaking water from old house.
That means, maybe you didn't see old house, but when you see old house, in the east I see, many
times old house are not really good maintaining,
wind is rain, water stays up there, and then just even the sun is shining outside, this water is
leaking.
Not too much at one time, just continually, just one, one, one. This is called old empty house that
is leaking, leaking.
Gaurav Amma Samba used example with that house, that house.
And what is it? Many times, in short time, will be good qualities. Then it's very beautiful, very
meaningful, perfect. Short time or good qualities.
Meditate is really good. You keep up. You didn't forget the instructions. When you meditate, keep
that anxiety, the instructions on which we went through.
It's cognitive, awareness, emptiness, inseparably, fresh, carefree, self-linear and technical.
Apply that in a short time, many times, whatever you can do, it will bring progress.
When your mind is settled, when our mind is beginning to settle nicely, then we can do long time.
Long time meditating, then it becomes bigger and better, wider and deeper.
And with this, with this meditation, then what things need? Next one.
Next one is two things, water or the sinking and the booziness of mind.
Next day, there's another two, two mozz. This is, now next day, apply, we need to need, apply the
antidote or too much, no sorry, not apply the antidote and apply too much antidote.
This is the two, again. So that means that we need apply the techniques, techniques during
meditation practices but also with balance.
Not too much and also not too little. Just the right, just the right. Balance, that is what we need
.
When the antidote or even is something, practice, teachings, teachings, when you have, remember,
when you didn't forget the instruction, when you don't have a lady in there,
you're keeping apart from the meditation with all the obstacles or the handiness of this sinking in
the wireless, then we have to relax.
We don't have to think too many things about the teachings. Just rest with confidence, with joy.
But if you need it, you're going to apply that. Apply that. Too much antidote or too much thinking
of these and that things, even is good, even is teaching.
This, it will slow down, okay? Slow down and then you become too external.
And to also lose, not applying, kind of like apply the technique and the teaching there, you know,
remember and just kind of like keep doing that, that also will slow down.
So therefore, not too little and not too much, apply, just right and then move forward.
Then, continuity. That is what practice teaches it.
Wherever we do this, then what comes? All those signs, all those experiences will come up.
And we've continually, as great mass pointed here, those blasphemous experiences, clarity
experiences and neutral experience, all that comes.
Those are good signs of the good achievements, but those are not final goals.
They are the dawn of the enlightenment, dawn of the realizations.
They are like, but this is not realization, it is self.
Self, we have to move. We have, and not grasping, not cling.
Those are the teaching here, mentioned.
In the teaching, all these teaching, here is very long teachings, and we start grasping.
Grasping, any of those, the dawn of the enlightenment, then it makes again, handless.
Because attachment, this attachment, no matter whatever that attachment is, whether even it is good
, it is attachment.
For that reason, what is teaching? All these teachings, on the post meditation level,
could have the devotion and joy and appreciation and bodhic and all that, all those beautiful
things bring up in post meditation.
But when you come to the meditation of the Sahaja or the Dzogi or the Mahamudar status,
you just let it merge, everything in the natural status.
We are not going to think of any of those, we are going to maintain that precious status, this
cognitive,
everless, emptiness status. We are going to maintain that status.
And once in a while, during those times, in the teaching said, during meditation, we can bring up
again love and compassion,
joy and everything is like magical display. Those thoughts just for a moment bring up that.
But let those also dissolve back to the source, where those all beautiful thoughts came.
From that, from that meaning, from that cognitive awareness or rupa and emptiness status, all that
came from it.
Let that merge back to that status and continue to fly, keep continue flying in that space of inner
space.
There is no boundaries, there is no limitations, there is no territories.
Pre-everything, keep continuous, with joy in every occasion as said, devotion, and keep continuing
that.
And otherwise, if anything kind of signs and indications or those qualities come up, every start of
grasping,
that's the great must point out in this book, you have the books.
And all those errors, mistakes will lead us, we will dilute to the dilute, dilute the status.
And then every verse, more clanging, grasping, what is the teaching said?
Every grasping more about the blissfulness, experience, that will lead us to take rebirth back to
the desire, desirings.
Every more grasping to the clarity aspect of the experience, it will take us back to the formless.
Every grasping to the neutral state of the mind, that experience, that is, take us to the formless
things.
What are those? It's then samsara. Again, almost we can't relate, may come back to the samsara.
We like to release the cause of samsara.
Samsara is fine according to the Mahayana, or the Mahayana, or the Vedayana teaching, it's a vital
status.
But we don't like to stay in samsara as samsara beings, as samsara citizens.
We don't like to be as citizens of samsara, in samsara.
We like to stay in samsara, but not as like subject and kind of tied up by the samsara as samsara
beings.
That, it will lead us back to that status, this status.
For that reason, all, every great master is teaching, and the Buddha, everything, said, no grasp.
And again, for those reasons, one of the great teachers in the Tibetan Buddhism is from Satya
schools of Tibetan Buddhism,
known as Japa Jamsim. He's very famous. He's one of the great masters of Tibetan Buddhism,
and he's also co-founder of the Satya schools of Tibetan Buddhism.
There's five great Satya masters came in the same family in ancient time,
in the 11th century, or toward the end of 10th century, 11th century.
Five great masters, just one after another, really great, five great masters.
Those are known as Kunga Himpo, Trava Jamsim, and Sohana Cemu.
Three, and then Satya Pendeta, and Rombu Chuyang Pappas.
Manetana said, three white, three ordinary, two ordinary ones.
Three white ones, and two red ones, so they say.
Three white ones, two red ones, all together five great masters, Satya schools.
Three white ones, that's not us, they are not us, they are practitioners, not us.
And two white, red ones are Satya Pendeta, who is the great master,
who visited Jangasan's god or royal teacher for the Jangish Kams, Jangish Kams.
And then, second one is Chuyang Pappas, Rombu Chuyang Pappas,
who become the, again, royal guru for the Kublakkams, Kublakkams.
These both are knowns, both are known, therefore they say, two red ones.
But among that, the three Mappas, Trava Jamsim, is the one, the very famous masters.
And he, in one of his teachings said, if you have the grasping, grasping, that is not you.
Actually, Manjushri spoke to him, spoke that.
In Zambar Sanathav, if there is a grasping, that is not you.